When Ros Atkins , a BBC radio presenter , came back to the UK after working in Mexico City , family and friends avoided him like he had , well , swine flu .
After reading his account , we wondered about others who have visited Mexico recently and experienced the same sort of reaction upon returning home .
Canada 's defense minister Peter MacKay demanded an apology from the presenter before attending a repatriation ceremony for Canadian troops who were killed in Afghanistan last Friday .
On Monday , Venezuela 's president Hugo Ch vez announced halting a program that provided free heating oil to low-income US citizens .
Photograph : Ismael Francisco\/AFP\/Getty images Raul Casto wants to end a 40-year-old diplomatic freeze by meeting Barack Obama
Today , people in Mexico City were being ordered not to kiss or shake hands , football matches went ahead without spectators , theaters , shops and museums closed , staff were inside locked schools scrubbing classrooms with disinfectant and health workers patrolled buses , ordering sickly-looking people home .
President Felipe Calder n said his government learned only on Thursday night what kind of virus Mexico was facing after tests by specialist laboratories in Canada confirmed the outbreak as a type labeled A\/H1N1 not previously seen in pigs or humans .
If the US government decides vaccine production is necessary , it would be used by manufacturers to get started .
Britain 's Foreign Office issued a warning to travellers about the outbreak but stopped short of recommending people did not visit Mexico .
This seems to be different , '' said Dr Arnold Monto , a flu expert with the University of Michigan .
Saturday 25 April 2009 23.24 BST Swine flu has similar symptoms to the more common , human seasonal form of influenza .
Avian flu - which has previously been the subject of pandemic fears after humans began contracting it - is another deadly strain .
There have been no cases identified in the UK for at least 10 years .
Seasonal flu is caused by viruses that are adapted to spread in humans , who have some natural immunity to common strains and can boost it by immunisation with a vaccine .
Avian flu is caused by influenza viruses adapted for infection in birds while swine flu is caused by influenza viruses adapted for infection in pigs .
Cabin crew member in hospital after flight from swine flu-struck Mexico World Health Organisation has warned countries to be on alert for any unusual flu outbreaks Saturday 25 April 2009 22.09 BST A member of cabin crew was taken to hospital with '' flu - like symptoms '' today after falling ill on a British Airways flight from Mexico City to Heathrow .
The World Health Organisation has warned countries to be on alert for any unusual flu outbreaks after a swine flu virus was implicated in possibly dozens of human deaths in Mexico .
The man was taken from flight BA242 which landed at 2pm today , a BA spokesman said .
`` As a precautionary measure the patient is being tested for a range of respiratory and other illnesses in line with UK health guidance .
`` Should we receive instructions from the Department for Health or the Health Protection Agency we will be well placed to respond appropriately . ''
Mexican swine flu deaths spark worldwide action WHO says virus has killed 81 people in Mexico as US declares public health emergency and travellers ' illnesses prompt concern in Europe and New Zealand Sunday 26 April 2009 18.45 BST People wear surgical masks as a precaution against infection on the Mexico City subway .
Nicola Sturgeon said the pair who flew back to Scotland on April 21 had not been in an area affected by recent outbreaks of swine influenza .
`` The patients have displayed mild flu-like symptoms and their current condition is not causing concern , '' she said .
US health officials took a similar line , urging visitors to wash their hands frequently .
Two inspectors boarded British Airways flight 242 to ask passengers and crew if they felt unwell .
While people do not normally catch it , humans can contract the virus , usually if they have been in close contact with pigs .
Experts believe it spreads in the same way as seasonal flu - through coughing and sneezing .
These illnesses all cause the same respiratory symptoms in sufferers and can be passed between one another .
When new influenza viruses are introduced into the environment , humans do not have any natural immunity to protect against them .
Anyone who has recently returned from affected countries should consult a doctor if they notice flu-like symptoms .
The appearance of new flu strains is therefore a perennial problem for doctors and scientists .
In New York City , health officials say about 75 students at a Queens high school have fallen ill with flu-like symptoms and testing is under way to rule out that is the same strain of swine flu found in Mexico .
No vaccine specifically protects against swine flu and it is unclear how much protection current generic vaccines might offer .
However , it could take months to create enough supplies for mass vaccination programs - if governments decide vaccine production is necessary .
Two drugs , Tamiflu and Relenza , seem effective against the new strain .
At least two more cases have been confirmed in Kansas , bringing the US total to 11 .
Additionally , at least eight students at a New York high school were last night also believed to have a form of human swine flu , but authorities are not yet certain if it is the same strain that has killed people in Mexico .
As a precautionary measure the patient is being tested for a range of respiratory and other illnesses ... At present there have been no confirmed cases of human swine flu in the UK or anywhere in Europe . ''
A BA spokeswoman said : `` We can confirm one of our cabin crew felt unwell during the flight from Mexico and was taken to hospital on arrival at Heathrow .
If the US government decides vaccine production is necessary , it would be used by manufacturers to get started .
The man , who has not been named , was taken to hospital yesterday with `` flu-like symptoms '' after landing at Heathrow .
Yesterday , people in Mexico City were being ordered not to kiss or shake hands .
Calder n said his government learned only on Thursday night what kind of virus Mexico was facing after tests by specialist laboratories in Canada confirmed the outbreak as a type - labeled A\/H1N1 - not previously seen in pigs or humans .
If the US government decides vaccine production is necessary , it would be used by manufacturers to get started .
US health officials took a similar line , urging visitors to wash their hands frequently .
The influenza pandemic of 1918 The current swine flu outbreak is of the same strain , H1N1 , as the great flu pandemic of 1918 .
Stealing the limelight from our officially appointed assassin , H5N1 , this porcine virus is a threat of unknown magnitude .
The paradox of this swine flu panic is that , while totally unexpected , it was accurately predicted .
But the corporate industrialisation of livestock production has broken China 's natural monopoly on influenza evolution .
This has been a transition from old-fashioned pig pens to vast excremental hells , containing tens of thousands of animals with weakened immune systems suffocating in heat and manure while exchanging pathogens at blinding velocity with their fellow inmates .
The commission reported systemic obstruction of their investigation by corporations , including blatant threats to withhold funding from cooperative researchers .
Instead of a postcode map , they have a slightly more old-fashioned list of 19 `` community websites '' from Kippax to Calverley but the point and content are much the same .
An immigration official wearing a surgical mask stands at Juan Santameria international airport in Cost Rica .
Photograph : Juan Carlos Ulate\/Reuters Live blog : The WHO has raised its pandemic alert level as Mexico is shut down for five days and new cases of swine flu have been confirmed in Peru and Switzerland .
Photograph : KPA\/Zuma\/Rex Live blog : The British couple being treated for swine flu have been named , as fears of a pandemic increases and the death toll in Mexico continues to rise .
Photograph : Miguel Tovar\/AP Live blog : As the death toll from swine flu in Mexico rises to more than 100 people , governments around the world are on high alert for a possible flu pandemic .
Experts are particularly anxious about flu viruses that spread from pigs to humans , because the animals can harbor several flu viruses at once , which can swap genes around and become more virulent .
The other two genes come from a swine virus found in European and Asian pigs .
Swine flu viruses rarely infect humans , but there have been sporadic cases in the past .
Younger people were probably hit harder by the 1918 flu virus because their immune systems over-reacted .
Making enough for Britain alone could take four to six months , an expert at the Health Protection Agency said .
This outbreak of influenza is viewed with alarm by public health workers .
However , the world may be much better prepared to cope with this outbreak than before .
One reason is that an earlier swine flu outbreak in the US , in 1976 , found both the political and medical\/public health worlds unprepared to cope with what appeared to be a serious threat of pandemic spread .
It is clear from the above that public health workers are better prepared to deal with this threat .
Medicine is also better prepared , since it can distribute the already stockpiled antiviral drugs , and has far better treatments for the pneumonias and other secondary problems that threaten life .
Photograph : Chaiwat Subprasom\/Reuters Barack Obama caps his pen after signing an executive order closing the Guant namo Bay prison .
Photograph : Charles Dharapak\/AP Barack Obama won last year 's presidential election on a message of hope and change .
One hundred days into his term of office in the White House , how would you grade Obama 's administration on its record so far ?
Photograph : AP Andy Worthington : Five years after the Abu Ghraib scandal , those who authorised the systemic abuse of prisoners may finally be investigated Continue reading ... Editorial : Inequality holds back millions of people from living fairly rewarded and fulfilled lives Paul Collier : Aid programs can go badly awry if there are no conditions .
Just look at China 's huge US bailout An electron micrograph of the A H1N1 swine influenza virus .
The health secretary , Alan Johnson , said yesterday that Tamiflu had proved effective on patients in Mexico .
Demand has historically been greatest for Tamiflu , which comes in tablet form , while Relenza must be inhaled .
The NHS signed contracts earlier this year with pharmaceutical companies Roche , which makes Tamiflu , and GlaxoSmithKline , which makes Relenza , to double its store of antiviral drugs , bringing our total capacity to 33.5 million treatment courses .
Scientists are working on developing a vaccine against the new strain .
But reporters at a European commission briefing in Luxembourg were told that although the industry was working as fast as possible and new measures meant it could be on the market much quicker than a normal vaccine , the process could still take up to half a year .
When Ros Atkins , a BBC radio presenter , came back to the UK after working in Mexico City , family and friends avoided him like he had , well , swine flu .
After reading his account , we wondered about others who have visited Mexico recently and experienced the same sort of reaction upon returning home .
It appears US television network Fox made the right move when they opted not to air Barack Obama 's press conference last night .
However , 19 million people tuned in to Obama 's White House press conference from the combined ratings of NBC , ABC and CBS .
First lady Michelle Obama makes the cut along with speechwriter Jon Favreau and personal assistant Reggie Love .
Trouble began yesterday when a health minister in Israel raised an objection to '' swine flu '' on the grounds of Jewish and Muslim sensitivities over pork .
Yakov Litzman , a member of an ultra-Orthodox Jewish community , came up with his own alternative : `` Mexican flu . ''
That had the advantage of sparing Jews and Muslims discomfort .
It had the disadvantage , however , of causing Mexicans even greater discomfort .
The European commission is calling it the `` novel flu virus '' , which as a description is accurate but will also become redundant as time passes .
Prepare for swine flu pandemic , WHO warns Health chiefs say plans to fight swine flu pandemic needed now , especially in developing world Tuesday 28 April 2009 17.37 BST The world should prepare for a possible swine flu pandemic , especially in developing nations which could be hit particularly hard by the virus , the World Health Organisation warned today .
Special efforts should be made towards less rich nations which `` really get hit disproportionately hard '' by pandemics , he said .
A spokesman for NHS Direct said the advice line had received almost 1,400 calls about suspected swine flu cases .
Officials in China , where some cases of bird flu and another virulent respiratory infection , Sars , were initially covered up in recent years , say the country has not yet confirmed any cases but have promised full transparency .
Health officials in Ireland said six people in the country were now being tested for possible exposure to the virus , which is a combination of pig , bird and human flu strains to which humans may have no natural immunity .
Britain will inevitably be hit by cases of swine flu , the government 's chief medical officer , Sir Liam Donaldson , told BBC 's radio 's World at One program .
US customs agents are now checking travelers arriving at airports , seaports and land border crossings for signs of illness , the Associated Press reports .
The agents will refer travelers who say they are not feeling well CDC officials for further screening , US customs and border protection spokesman Lloyd Easterling tells AP .
New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg today said that health officials believe more than 100 people at the St Francis Preparatory School had been sickened , with 28 cases confirmed .
US homeland security secretary Janet Napolitano said travel warnings to Mexico will continue until the flu abates , and nixed talk of closing America 's southern border .
But we have to remember this is a very small number so far .
I am always amazed at the outcry over rail or air safety when so few people die in accidents associated with either form of transport .
And yet as a society we are prepared to tolerate thousands of road deaths without making any fuss at all and even resisting the lowering of the speed limit or the introduction of speed cameras which reduce that risk .
But we have to get these things in proportion .
People need to weigh up the probabilities and make decisions for themselves .
However , he does admit the situation is `` potentially serious '' in his polemic , which ends with a call for newspapers to be removed from private ownership .
Szwarc also suggests the deaths in Mexico may not be attributable to it being afflicted by a more virulent strain , but rather extreme poverty .
On Twitter , John Dyer in Texas writes that the university where his wife teaches has instructed staff to bow or nod rather than shake hands .
New York City Mayor Mike Bloomberg said today that officials supect children at a second school in Queens have taken ill with swine flu .
Coroner 's spokesman Craig Harvey said Bellflower Medical Center reported the death of a 33-year Long Beach resident Monday afternoon from symptoms resembling swine flu .
The World Health Organisation -LRB- WHO -RRB- is now calling the virus , which has infected an estimated 1,000 people and killed around 150 in Mexico , an `` international public health emergency '' that could reach global pandemic levels .
Smithfield has released a statement denying any link between the outbreak and Granjas Carrol 's operations in Mexico .
This is not the first time intensive , industrialised agriculture has been accused of spreading disease .
Within crowded chicken factory farms , the mild virus can evolve rapidly towards more dangerous and highly transmissible forms , capable of jumping species and spreading back into wild birds , which are defenceless against the new strain .
Experts are increasingly warning that the practices of intensive farming must be reviewed and regulated .
London mayor donates Tamiflu stockpile to UK amid swine flu warnings Boris Johnson confirms tried and tested plans in place to protect capital from virus Tuesday 28 April 2009 16.35 BST Tamiflu , which will be used if swine flu breaks out in Britain .
Swine flu , an apparently new strain of the H1N1 virus , has been confirmed in seven countries , and suspected outbreaks are being investigated in other places , including Ireland , Germany , Italy , Sweden and Denmark , amid warnings from the World Health Organisation that the disease can no longer be contained .
The mayor is `` seeking assurances '' that London 's needs are fully considered in any contingency plans for the capital , according to a statement issued by his office .
Thankfully , so far the virus has not been reported in London , but I 'd like to reassure everyone that tried and tested plans are in place to combat any threat , swiftly and comprehensively . ''
The Tamiflu drugs were purchased by Johnson 's predecessor , Ken Livingstone , at a cost of # 1m as a precaution to help keep London 's public services running .
Facemasks ca n't stop the disease spreading , Johnson said , but it can be a help for NHS staff he says .
From Mexico , Tara Huntington Hyde wonders on Comment is free : As multiple sources and medical experts have pointed out in the media , common strains of flu are responsible for far more deaths each year .
Severin Carrell reports that the three British swine flu victims were all aboard a Thomson Airways First Choice flight from Canc n to Birmingham on April 21 .
Ferguson notes the only US death from swine flu was a Mexican toddler who traveled to Houston on holiday with his family .
WHO Director General Dr Margaret Chan just announced the organization is raising its flu pandemic alert level to phase 5 out of 6 .
Appropriately panicked , on Monday ministers plunged into their Cobra bunker beneath Whitehall to prepare for the worst .
They can not relate bad news from Mexico to the risk that inevitably surrounds their lives .
It would make more sense to proffer such a warning against the American crime rate .
During the BSE scare of 1995-7 , grown men with medical degrees predicted doom , terrifying ministers into mad politician disease .
The bird might pose no threat to Scotland , but how dare he deny London journalists a good panic ?
Latest data shows a huge increase .
Get the figures here An electron micrograph of the A H1N1 swine influenza virus .
Photograph : Centers for Disease Control\/Reuters The public panic about swine flu is completely out of proportion to the threat involved .
People do n't seem to understand the concept of risk any more Continue reading ...
Ireland also reported its first probable case of swine flu this afternoon , a man who has recently returned from Mexico .
Pat Wall , professor of public health at University College Dublin , said the case was `` likely to be positive '' .
A second newlywed couple who feared they had contracted swine flu in Mexico were among those given the all-clear .
English said the girl attended school on Wednesday to Friday last week after returning from holiday but had not been in since .
A spokesman for Crossways pharmacy , also in Paignton , said : `` Our customers are very keen to take precautionary measures against swine flu .
Three thousand children die of malaria every day in Africa , I want to say .
But once again HIV , rightly or wrongly , is only perceived as a threat to `` high risk '' groups .
Some 10,000 people die of influenza every year in Britain during the normal winter flu season .
So far the Mexican flu has killed a grand total of just 160 people worldwide .
There is no reason , as yet , to believe that we are on the brink of a similar disaster .
Random violence , suicide attacks , kidnapping and armed robbery are daily problems facing the 3 million people currently dependent on food aid .
Egyptian health ministers said today that the cull of 250,000 pigs was not in fact an anti-flu measure , but a more general santitation effort .
Mexican President Felipe Calderon effectively shut down the country 's economy today , asking that only essential businesses like supermarkets , pharmacies , and gas stations remain open until Tuesday .
Dr Keiji Fukuda said the organization has begun distributing stocks of anti-flu drugs to vulnerable countries , but he did not specify which .
Newcastle University fine arts student , Claire Coldwell , 21 , said she was more worried about exams than swine flu : `` This is the place where you can most easily pick up any sort of virus . ''
Andrew Sachs talks to Simon Hattenstone about his involvement with the Russell Brand show controversy Lincolnshire County Council has set up a text service to inform parents of school closures cents 11 million Britons expected to take to roads Royal Free Hampstead Hospital Trust is yet to see significant cost benefits from its introduction of Cerner 's Millennium software a year ago , due to high costs of implementation Five trusts are planning to implement a significantly expanded version of Lorenzo , with at least two to go live by the end of this year Entering data is a challenge for medical professionals used to writing or dictating notes , according to the clinical lead for mental health software cents Mexicans told to stay indoors for five days Security editor Richard Norton-Taylor comments on the possibility , raised by the Conservatives , of scrapping Trident Alan Travis reports on the threefold rise in police stop and searches Mick Brookes of the National Association of Head Teachers on bringing IT on to primary schools ' curriculum cents Attacker had lost job and faced eviction , say neighbors Andrew Sparrow reports that MP 's voted to reform their expenses ' system Rory Carroll reports from Mexico City on the country 's five-day shutdown Swine flu hits Mexico 's economy ; Commons votes on MPs ' expenses ; and the future of Trident , in our daily audio show Which international leaders messed up most this week ?
Simon Tisdall , the Guardian 's foreign affairs columnist , is keeping a tally .
Click on the cards below to see this week 's leading gaffers and goofers .
Leave your comments below It was significant that UK forces handed over the base not to the Iraqis but the Americans Half of Scotland 's local authorities have begun to use a new Online Planning Information System From the archive : 1 May 1992 Protests turn violent after jury acquits policemen charged with excessive use of force on Rodney King Kyaw Kyaw Min is 16 , and the sole provider for his two younger siblings since he lost both parents to Nargis .
He and other child orphans tell their story
As Pacitti and the others sat around Iain Askham , they noticed he seemed tired .
That was put down to jetlag but 48 hours later , Askham and his wife , Dawn , were swept into an isolation ward at Monklands hospital , 20 miles away in Airdrie , the first two British cases of swine flu .
`` The worst was when I started to get headaches and feel quite feverish . ''
Yet earlier this week , Pacitti assumed he had avoided catching the virus .
He had initially been cleared after he and two other members of that group out drinking with Askham and his best man , Neil Gardner , 26 , developed mild cold-like symptoms .
Farmers in Egypt clashed yesterday with officials who had come to destroy their pigs .
Not wishing to let science stand in the way of a rousing speech , members of the Egyptian parliament -LRB- whose upper house was carelessly wrecked by fire not so long ago -RRB- have been railing against the enemy within , and calling for pigs to be exterminated or removed from centres of population .
The website also has a discussion forum where readers air their prejudices against pigs .
If that turns out to be the official line it could seriously damage community relations .
Otherwise , as so often in Egypt , it is likely to make matters worse rather than better .
Further up the street there was another glimpse of life : three policeman at a junction waiting for traffic to direct .
Smog had cleared , revealing an azure sky , but the city felt heavy , expectant .
It may not help much that there is a t-shirt for sale which bears the image of a pig and the slogan : `` I went to Mexico City and all I got was swine flu . ''
I Am Legend , perhaps , or 28 Days Later , but there were no zombies , just ordinary people making the best of a grim situation .
On Thursday , as lockdown approached , the only queues were outside DVD shops .
Sir Liam Donaldson , chief medical advisor , said : `` The first non-imported cases of swine flu have been confirmed in England and Scotland .
Until now cases were confined to people who had themselves recently come back from Mexico .
The person we 're confirming as positive today had n't been in Mexico or any other affected area .
One other passenger on the flight , a 12-year-old girl from Torbay , in Devon , has since been diagnosed with swine flu .
`` What I can tell you is that everybody who was in close contact , the 1-metre area for more than an hour obviously anyone near them on a long-haul flight either has been or is being traced .
Its ability to spread between people , while there , is not enormous . ''
I really do n't see it becoming a major mortality event .
Robert Booy , head of clinical research at the National Centre for Immunisation Research and Surveillance based at the University of Sydney , believes there is a simple explanation for the concentration of more than 100 deaths in Mexico .
Influenza tends to , on average , infect two people for every one case .
`` If the disease has been around for two months and infected so many people , many of them must be mildly infected and we have n't heard about them . ''
When Ros Atkins , a BBC radio presenter , came back to the UK after working in Mexico City , family and friends avoided him like he had , well , swine flu .
After reading his account , we wondered about others who have visited Mexico recently and experienced the same sort of reaction upon returning home .
Or have you changed your travel plans as a result of the disease ?
Share your thoughts by sending us a response on our GuardianUS Twitter page .
Of course , you can always comment on this blog post .
A 12-year-old girl was also among five new cases , prompting the immediate closure of her school in south Gloucestershire .
At this stage close contacts who should be offered antivirals -LRB- are those -RRB- who have been exposed to a probable or confirmed case within the previous seven days for longer than one hour and within a distance of one metre . ''
Earlier yesterday Gordon Brown offered reassurance that Britain was well-placed to deal with the outbreak .
On a visit to an NHS Direct call center in Beckenham , south-east London , he said the advice line was coping well with demand .
Brown added : `` This is happening in every country of the world , but we are better prepared .
Swine flu is currently being passed from human to human , and it is possible that this particular strain of swine flu was created without ever seeing a pig directly , as UN 's Food and Agriculture Organisation 's -LRB- FAO -RRB- experts on animal health point out .
The reason experts have invested so much effort in preparing for a flu pandemic and are taking this one so seriously , is that these rapidly evolving strains that mix bird , pig and human forms could throw up a particularly deadly variety .
Health experts have warned for years about the danger of intensive livestock farming creating new and rampant human disease .
A coincidence of drought in two or more grain producing countries could , for example , lead to price spikes and shortages .
Official government figures show that there has been a steady erosion of any slack in the system .
`` Deciding to give priority for a new vaccine will be a judgment call , based on evidence we are now gathering about the swine flu virus 's behavior , '' said Professor David Salisbury , head of immunisation at the Department of Health .
`` We have injected viruses into hen 's eggs , where they will grow for two or three days before being extracted , '' said Dr James Robertson , a virologist .
Proteins on their surfaces will be removed , mixed with chemical preservatives and a swine flu vaccine created .
`` Only about 20 % take up offers of immunisation , compared with the elderly , who have a 70 to 75 % uptake .
We are going to need to have all our doctors , nurses , ambulance drivers and other carers at work if there is a second serious outbreak later in the year and not at home in bed , sick .
Initial reports that 176 people had died from swine flu in Mexico were only suspected cases .
Hospitals in the country have also noted a drop in patients appearing with fevers as officials think public health messages such as washing hands regularly must be getting through .
The number of cases has been small but no one yet knows how far the H1N1 virus will spread , how it will mutate and how many people will be caught up in this first wave of infection .
By raising its global alert status to level 5 , the WHO thinks that a pandemic is imminent .
Previous pandemics have behaved in this way , such as the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic , with a second or third wave returning months later to infect many more people than the milder first wave .
Now , instead of harnessing anxiety for religious devotion and boosting its influence the church risks being sidelined .
But late yesterday the health minister , Jose Angel Cordova , dented optimism by saying 11 people were suspected to have died within 24 hours .
The Catholic hierarchy , frustrated that it can not convoke large gatherings , has come up with several tactics to remain relevant .
Cardinal Norbeto Rivera has written a prayer , which people can recite at home , asking for divine deliverance from swine flu .
`` We took it out to ask for intercession in the epidemic , '' said Felipe Sanchez , a priest and cathedral spokesman .
It is important to make this clear because -LRB- otherwise -RRB- when we announce level six it will cause unnecessary panic , '' she told Spain 's El Pa s newspaper .
But they agreed that going to the highest level could be an eventuality .
Raising the alert level to six would mean that a global pandemic was in full effect .
The Financial Times also reported that Chan , who recently raised the threat of a pandemic to level five , had suggested a move to level six was likely .
The outbreak has raised concerns over its potential impact on tourism .
One was a nerve conduction study , which basically involves passing an electric current through sections of your arm , hands , and wrist to measure what happens .
Sadly , our magic controllable world is an illusion bearing little relation to the one we actually inhabit , where bad things sometimes occur for no reason .
Having just finished a TV series that spent most of its time debunking news broadcasts , I 've been swamped with emails and Tweets saying , `` Ha ha - the news is really overdoing it on this whole swine flu thing , eh ? ''
Sars and bird flu may have failed -LRB- so far -RRB- to become pandemics , but only because health professionals took the threat seriously .
You can catch this virus by touching , say , an infected doorhandle , then absent-mindedly wiping your eye five minutes later .
Now five more pupils , off sick on Friday , have been confirmed as having contracted the virus .
The school has arranged for all pupils and staff to be offered antiviral treatment tonight or tomorrow morning .
Yesterday health officials announced that South Hampstead high school would be closed until Thursday on advice from the HPA .
The oil industry is distributing treatment kits , including antiviral drugs , to North Sea installations in case of an outbreak on a platform .
Thomas Tsang , controller of Hong Kong 's center for health protection , said all those at the hotel were healthy .
Heads have a legal responsibility to make sure their children and staff are safe at school .
Other options include looking at how pupils can sit exams in isolation even if a school is closed .
The HPA said schools were a special case because children play together and are frequently in close physical contact .
Only those who have been working within one metre of the affected person for an hour or more are considered sufficiently at risk to be given antiviral drugs such as Tamiflu , which can prevent them falling sick .
Dr John McConnell , editor of the Lancet Infectious Diseases journal , said in an online comment in the Lancet that 16 times as much antiviral medicine is needed to prevent illness as to treat people .
Five schools shut because of swine flu GCSE and A-level exams rescheduled as schools in London and south-west close to prevent virus spread Tuesday 5 May 2009 14.37 BST Governors at Dolphin school in Battersea decided to shut its doors as a precaution after two of its pupils were confirmed with the virus .
Alleyn 's school in Dulwich , south-east London , closed when six pupils were confirmed with having the H1N1 virus yesterday .
Downend school , in south Gloucestershire , will be closed this week after a 12-year-old was confirmed to have the virus .
The school said it would be making arrangements for a `` deep clean '' and hoped to open again next week .
More than 1,200 private schools have been told to consider setting up `` quarantine rooms '' for pupils suspected of having the virus .
`` Regarding the risk of being infected by an influenza virus , travellers are advised , whenever possible , to avoid crowded enclosed spaces and close contact with people suffering from acute respiratory infections .
Hand-washing after direct contact with ill persons or their environment may reduce the risk of illness .
Ill persons should be encouraged to practice cough etiquette -LRB- maintain distance , cover coughs and sneezes with disposable tissues or clothing , wash hands -RRB- . ''
British Airways is still operating four flights a week to Mexico City , but is offering its customers the option of making amendments -LRB- a change of dates or an alternative destination up to the same value -RRB- without incurring an administration fee on bookings while the FCO advisory against travel to Mexico remains .
China has sent a plane to Mexico to collect Chinese nationals , while a plane chartered by the Mexican government arrived in Shanghai today to bring home more than 70 Mexicans who have been held in a hotel since last week despite not showing any symptoms of swine flu .
Health officials today announced one more confirmed case of swine flu in Britain , taking the national total to 28 .
This week , five year seven pupils at Alleyn 's school in Dulwich , south-east London , tested positive for the virus .
Alleyn 's shares facilities , including buses , with at least two other schools , James Allen 's girls ' school and Dulwich College .
A traveller from Fife , thought to have contracted the virus in Las Vegas , is under voluntary quarantine .
Scottish officials were investigating another probable case involving a 21-year-old woman from Grampian who recently traveled to New York .
Zoo animal placed in quarantine over swine flu fears Wednesday 6 May 2009 15.16 BST It was lonely enough anyway , being the only pig in one of the world 's most devoutly Muslim countries .
But at the weekend it was removed and put in solitary confinement after visitors became alarmed .
`` We 've done this because people are worried about getting the flu . ''
While there is speculation that the new strain of the H1N1 virus could have originated on industrial pig farms before spreading to humans , there would appear to be little risk from a solitary pig , particularly in a country with no direct flight connections with Mexico , where the majority of the 1,000 or so worldwide swine flu cases have been identified so far .
Lonely though Kabul zoo 's pig might be , it has actually escaped lightly by the standards of its peers in some other countries .
It is understood that children could sit exams elsewhere or , if they are sick with the virus , be awarded a grade based on papers or coursework they have completed .
It was not known whether pupils at any of the affected schools were sitting this exam .
Basing final results on other evidence , like coursework or modules already completed -LRB- also known as special consideration -RRB- , is just one contingency arrangement , and would only happen in specific circumstances where a student was unable to take a particular exam .
`` This is a tried and tested system that exam boards use to award students grades if they are unable to take an exam for a given reason . ''
Alleyn 's school , which closed after five year seven pupils were diagnosed with swine flu on Monday , said it was rescheduling A-level exams in art , biology and foreign languages for next week .
cents Advice will be reviewed if virus continues to spread cents Over-50s might have some immunity to H1N1 strain Swine flu may be more infectious than so far appears in the UK and the current guidance on catching it may have to be changed , the chief medical officer , Sir Liam Donaldson , warned today .
In the UK , the Health Protection Agency says that only those who have been within one metre of an infected person for more than an hour are considered to be at risk .
`` We have to wait another few weeks for characterisation of the virus , '' he said .
Last night five swine flu cases were confirmed in Brazil and Argentina .
Patients and their family members would receive drugs , but not others who might have been in contact .
Five new cases were diagnosed in the UK today four schoolchildren and an adult linked to Alleyn 's School in Dulwich , south London , which has been closed all week after six pupils were diagnosed with the illness .
Mexico remains the worst affected country , with more than 1,100 laboratory-confirmed human cases of H1N1 virus influenza , including 42 deaths .
Johnson said : `` A significant step towards protecting the world 's health against swine flu has been taken .
At a meeting of Asian health ministers in Bangkok today , the WHO director general , Dr Margaret Chan , said the world was `` better prepared for an influenza pandemic than at any time in history '' , largely because of precautions taken over the threat of bird flu .
She said : `` Years of alert and expectation mean that most countries now have preparedness plans .
At least two couples formed lasting relationships during their week-long incarceration , according to the South China Morning Post .
`` It 's nice to smell fresh air , '' added a British man who identified himself only as Matt .
The Mexican president , Felipe Calder n , complained of a backlash against Mexicans abroad .
Chinese authorities countered that their experience of the Sars outbreak had taught them to be cautious .
Thomas Tsang , head of Hong Kong 's Centre for Health Protection , said officials would be reviewing their quarantine procedures .
`` Today there are almost 3,000 probable and confirmed cases here in the United States , '' she said .
The US department of health said a man in Washington state with H1N1 influenza died last week .
Mary Selecky , Washington state 's secretary of health , said : `` We urge people to take this outbreak very seriously . ''
Canadian officials said a woman who died there also had other health problems , but gave no further details .
A Department of Health spokeswoman said one of the three new adult cases was linked to travel to Mexico , while six children infected all attended the same school .
Patient developed symptoms on domestic flight from Beijing to Chengdu , in Sichuan , after traveling from the US Monday 11 May 2009 13.41 BST A student recently returned from the US has become mainland China 's first confirmed case of swine flu , prompting the Chinese authorities to try to quarantine all those who shared a flight with him .
He developed symptoms on a domestic flight from Beijing to Chengdu , in Sichuan , the health ministry said .
The country 's only previous confirmed case was a Mexican man who had traveled to Hong Kong .
The Chinese authorities , chastened by that experience , have been accused of overreactingn to swine flu .
China 's response has drawn complaints from Mexico that its citizens were quarantined on the basis of their nationality alone .
Space shuttle Atlantis launches on a mission to service the Hubble space telescope Transport for London will start trials of speed governing equipment on a bus , a taxi and its own maintenance vehicles this summer Pontiff makes historic visit to Israel and the Palestinian territories The Planning Portal is to be relaunched to offer personalised services to its users , following the renewal of its contract with IBM A selection of the best images from around the world Hundreds of thousands of people are believed to be displaced as a result of military operations against the Taliban .
Over 150,000 Internally Displaced Persons who have fled Swat , Buner and Lower Dir , face harsh living conditions in camps The prime minister has confirmed that Christopher Graham will start as information commissioner for five years from 29 June Cabinet ministers to offer advice and guidance to third sector organizations struggling with the recession Did you soak up the news , or the sunshine instead ?
The government could save around # 400m each year if it canceled identity cards and stuck with the current generation of passports , according to Home Office figures Battersea Dogs & Cats Home has reported a 20.5 % rise in the number of dogs rehomed since the start of the year .
These portraits of dogs awaiting rehoming are by David Levene
Swine flu could affect third of world 's population , says study Researchers say swine flu will spread around world within nine months , as UK confirms three more cases Tuesday 12 May 2009 16.36 BST The swine flu virus will infect a third of the world 's population if it continues to spread at its current rate , scientists warned today , as three more cases were confirmed in the UK .
The three patients two children and one adult from London all had close contact with previously confirmed cases .
`` My hunch is that the death rate will be lower elsewhere Mexico has underlying issues with respiratory disease , '' he said .
But it is still possible it could be -LRB- like -RRB- 1957 where about three to four out of 1,000 people who were infected died and overall about 3 million to 4 million people died that year because of the pandemic worldwide or it could be even milder than that , like the 1968 pandemic which was barely worse than a normal seasonal flu year .
`` One of the key decisions which has to be made this week by the world community is how much do we switch over current vaccine production for seasonal flu to make a vaccine against this particular virus . ''
Keith Pearson , head of the NHS Confederation , is determined to put compassion and dignity at the heart of caring for the elderly Scheme will help patients confused by different uniforms in England , where a nurse in one trust may be dressed like a cleaner in another Initiative follows survey findings that 78 % of NHS staff are scared to report concerns of unsafe practices on wards Body of 22-year-old man discovered in decommissioned cubicle in Watford general hospital four days after discharge 7 May 2009 : Government response to Baby P scandal promises money to raise profile of social work but does not address ring-fenced child protection budgets 6 May 2009 : Children 's secretary , Ed Balls ducks key issue of whether child protection is adequately funded by the government Reform criticised by Tories and Lib Dems as a ` quick fix ' , as recommendation for ring-fenced child protection budgets is rejected Binge drinking in women has almost doubled since 1998 , new research shows
The supermarket giant stands accused of not paying workers at its farms a living wage Northern Ireland 's minister for employment and learning Sir Reg Empey has announced a scheme of free ICT training for adults Senior civil servants send a stern warning to MPS to lay off from reducing their benefits , terms , and conditions BT 's contract with the NHS London Programme for IT has contributed to a # 1.3 bn writedown by the firm 's Global Services division Councils have earned the right to more fiscal autonomy , so why not let them budget for three years instead of one ?
Great Britain 's national mapping agency has agreed to provide data to all of Scotland 's public sector bodies under one arrangement Our man at Bilderberg : They 're watching and following me , I tell you Charlie Skelton continues his quest to unmask the world 's most powerful cabal and foil its evil plan to take over the world well , sort of Paul Drummond tells Jon Dennis about his book on the 13th Floor Elevators and CD set BT 's contract with the NHS London Programme for IT has contributed to a # 1.3 bn writedown by the firm 's Global Services division You have been keeping up , right ?
Test your knowledge here Ed Pilkington on two 56 year-old women who discovered they were switched at birth cents Court rejects leniency plea of Mohamed D'Ali Carvalho Santos Michael White on the election effects of the row over MPs ' expenses IAEA says more countries could acquire nuclear arms ; effects of MPs ' expenses scandal ; and the 13th Floor Elevators , in our daily audio show Which international leaders messed up most this week ?
Simon Tisdall , the Guardian 's foreign affairs columnist , is keeping a tally .
Click on the cards below to see this week 's leading gaffers and goofers .
Photograph : Reuters\/Eliana Aponte Mexico City lowered its swine flu alert level from yellow to green late last night as the mayor , Marcelo Ebrard , claimed residents could `` relax '' as there had been no new infections for a week .
In Italy , two secondary schools in Rome have been ordered to close for a week after four students caught the H1N1 flu virus on a trip to New York .
The country 's confirmed toll has been rising as scientists test a backlog of samples from patients .
Nearly 80 % of those who died were between 20 and 54 , according to the health department .
New test results from the US Centres of Disease Control show that people in their 60s and older have signs of greater immunity to the new swine flu virus .
Pupils at Welford primary in Handsworth , Birmingham , began feeling ill last week when three cases were initially diagnosed .
The Health Protection Agency -LRB- HPA -RRB- insisted that high rates of infection were to be expected in school environments where children come into close contact with one another .
Of four cases confirmed on Monday in the UK , one was yesterday revealed to be a two-year-old boy from Oxford .
A DoH spokesman said : `` The localized cases of swine flu found in the UK have so far been mild , and we have not seen evidence of widespread community transmission .
`` But we must not be complacent it is right to prepare for the possibility of a global pandemic .
Health Service is named in Top 20 of employers from private and public sector who offer a supportive and flexible working arrangement for employees Royal Mail Group -LRB- RMG -RRB- has begun to look for a systems integration and business transformation partner for its online operations A selection of the best images from around the world The Government Procurement Service -LRB- GPS -RRB- has launched an online portal for Whitehall procurement professionals From body-building title holder to governor of California and box office-smashing Hollywood actor along the way , a look back at Arnold Schwarzenegger 's career in pictures LB Enfield has begun to put into effect its plan for a ` Right First Time ' service Julian Glover on the different proposals swirling around Westminster in the wake of the expenses scandal Michael Tomasky discusses Sonia Sotomayor , President Barack Obama 's nominee for the US supreme court Tokyo correspondent Justin McCurry on North Korea 's continuing nuclear ambitions and its threat on South Korea Amnesty International head sees credit crunch as deepening human rights woes ; reforming British politics ; and Obama 's high court pick , in our daily audio show with Jim Falzarano Irene Khan , Amnesty International 's secretary general , on why the credit crunch has led to a rise in human rights abuses
The school is currently closed for half-term and had been due to reopen on Sunday May 31 .
Another cluster of cases continues to grow in Glasgow , where it emerged that a primary school child living next door to the man critically ill in hospital was being treated as a probable case .
Two other pupils at the school who have already been identified as confirmed cases are children of the 37-year-old man , who has other health problems and is now in an isolation ward at Victoria infirmary in Glasgow .
The HPA disclosed today that British scientists had created a genetically engineered strain of the swine flu virus suitable for vaccine manufacture , which will now be given to drugs makers and laboratories worldwide .
Scientists in the US and Australia have produced other strains suitable for vaccine manufacture .
In Spain , which has 143 confirmed cases , only 43 people caught the infection at home .
Sheila Bird , professor of biostatistics at Cambridge University , criticised Britain 's Health Protection Agency for failing to publish the information , which emerged only in a European report on the epidemic .
Work has begun on a swine flu vaccine , which is expected to go into clinical trials in the next few months .
But it is unlikely to be ready for widespread use until October .
uk - including information on whether the infections were acquired here or abroad , what age groups are being affected and other important epidemiological data . ''
Air France CEO makes a statement to the press about the aviation catastrophe Did you read them , or use them for a sun hat ?
Pictures from the disappearance over the Atlantic of flight 447 from Brazil to Paris Better an uncomfortable intrusion into people 's lives than blind ignorance , say Guardian correspondent David Smith Transport secretary Geoff Hoon has admitted that Britain is ' a long way short ' of introducing national road charging East Sussex and Lincolnshire are using interactive maps to display information about the 4 June elections Reaction to the killing of George Tiller , one of the few US doctors to perform so-called late-term abortions , at his Kansas church US forces use technology to fight terrorists ; Brown faces election battering ; and the demise of General Motors in our daily show Robert Booth reports on the millionaire businessman Ian Griffin who is suspected of killing his girlfriend in Paris cents Wichita clinic had been target of anti-choice anger In the past two decades the once-beautiful Spanish coastline has been ravaged by the construction of hotels , apartment blocks and second homes .
Here are some of the worst examples
Photograph : David Moir\/Reuters The formal declaration of a global flu pandemic is bound to trigger anxiety and possibly panic .
The pandemic tag is to do with geography , public health experts say , and not severity .
Swine flu has to be officially designated a pandemic because it is spreading easily in two distinct regions , the Americas and now Australia .
By yesterday , 18 people had been admitted to hospital , with five in intensive care or high-dependency units .
`` Based on this experience , Health Protection Scotland has expressed the view that sustained community transmission appears to be taking place . ''
The WHO chief , Dr Margaret Chan , yesterday examined data from eight countries with large numbers of swine flu cases .
Raising the alert level reflects that the virus is more widespread , but not necessarily more dangerous although there are fears that infections could overwhelm hospitals and health authorities , especially in poorer countries .
Most cases have been mild , although employers are being warned to prepare for absences through illness .
One manufacturer , GlaxoSmithKline PLC , said it could start large-scale production by July but large quantities would not be available for several months .
At the NHS Confederation conference , senior health service managers held an early-morning session to refine their emergency plans .
It has been interesting to observe different sectors of society have reacted .
So far , however , there has been only a handful of cases to report , and these people appear to have suffered little more than a bad cold , leaving the public -LRB- and even some journalists -RRB- slightly baffled at what all the fuss is about or even if we should be making a fuss at all .
It is also important to remember that we are extremely lucky that the type of flu we are now facing , Influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- , is a less deadly strain than might have mutated from the H5N1 bird flu many scientists expected .
The doomsday predictions of 750,000 UK dead are , thankfully , unlikely to be realized .
Hospitals will have to cope with an increased number of admissions , possibly while their staff is depleted by illness .
With 1,300 cases now being reported in Australia , and simultaneous community outbreaks in Chile , Japan and the United States , Chan said scientists had concluded that transmission was `` unstoppable '' hence the decision to declare a maximum pandemic alert at level six .
In 2007 , the latest year for which figures are available , Aids-related illness killed 2 million people worldwide , including 270,000 children .
But because two-thirds of the 33 million people annually infected with HIV live in sub-Saharan Africa and the remainder belong , by and large , to discrete `` high-risk '' groups such as intravenous drug users , HIV no longer blips on our radar screens .
Or as a taxi driver in York put it en route to York University 's biology department where scientists are currently breeding high-yielding strains of Artemisia Annua , the plant from which artemisinin is derived , to produce sufficient quantities of the drug for Cambodia `` Unless it affects someone in my family , why should I care ? ''
In the past , WHO defined an influenza pandemic as causing `` enormous numbers of deaths and illness '' .
On Thursday , they announced swine flu had achieved pandemic status , the first strain of influenza to reach this mark for 41 years .
Are we again set to face a disease that can kill millions as happened with the pandemics of 1918 , 1957 and 1968 ?
These protein pieces are important because they stimulate immune responses in humans and can be used to make a vaccine .
`` It remains to be seen if pharmaceuticals can rely on using adjuvants and still produce a single dose vaccine against swine flu , '' he said .
If a reinvigorated , more virulent forms appears late in the year , health and pharmaceutical workers could have enough time to prepare reasonable supplies of vaccine .
cents Glider pilot parachuted to safety A selection of the best images from around the world Thousands of people clashed with police after the election victory of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad UK-based relatives of Sri Lankan war victims pose with pictures of dead and missing family members 12,000 insurance for old age
A statement from NHS Greater Glasgow said : `` Earlier this evening , baby Jack , the son of Jacqueline Fleming and her partner William McCann , tragically passed away . ''
However , Sir Liam Donaldson , the chief medical officer for England and Wales , said the virus was causing very few illnesses compared with normal seasonal flu viruses , although a `` large surge '' in numbers was likely this autumn .
With more than 30,000 people affected worldwide , the World Health Organisation reported last Friday that only 145 had died .
Professor Hugh Pennington , a bacteriologist at Aberdeen University , said that swine flu deaths were not unexpected .
`` This is a flu virus , it is in no way different from an ordinary winter flu virus , so if there are enough cases some people will have to be admitted to hospital and some will die . ''
Wednesday 17 June 2009 15.39 BST Government officials today warned that anyone with flu symptoms should stay away from pigs as evidence mounted that the present swine flu virus in humans could potentially infect the animals .
Animal and public health specialists remain cautious about the consequences of their findings , which they describe as `` preliminary '' , saying firm conclusions can not be drawn .
Despite its name , there are no known cases of people infected in the present swine flu crisis catching the illness from pigs or other animals , but there has been a case in Canada where pigs are thought to have caught the flu from a carpenter returning from Mexico .
However , swine flu is caused by a virus that usually infects pigs , and the animals are among those generally considered most likely to act as mixing vessels for different strains of flu that could turn into highly contagious diseases .
Defra , the government department responsible for the agricultural monitoring against swine flu in pigs , said : `` These findings reinforce existing guidance to pig keepers -LRB- or anyone else coming into contact with pigs -RRB- that they should stay out of contact with pigs if they have flu-like symptoms and should continue to practice high levels of hygiene .
Swine flu diagnosis doubts prompt tests rethink Scottish suspected swine flu cases to be checked by labs before being announced after apparent misdiagnoses by doctors Wednesday 17 June 2009 19.29 BST Scores of swine flu cases in Scotland may have been wrongly diagnosed by family doctors , it emerged today , forcing health officials to abandon a new testing regime .
The victim , Jacqui Fleming , 38 , from Carnwadric , Glasgow , also had underlying health problems .
After doctors reported 351 cases in Glasgow and Paisley yesterday a dramatic increase on previous daily results doubts emerged about the accuracy of their diagnoses .
As a result , every suspected case of H1N1 swine flu will now be checked by laboratories before being announced .
That is why we have resumed laboratory testing for all cases in the Greater Glasgow and Clyde area .
